[DESIGN] Bidi usability (#754)
unicode-org/message-format-wg: exploration/bidi-usability.md

Translators need to work with the target-language versions of each _message_.
Like many templating or domain-specific languages, MFv2 uses neutrally-directional symbols
to form portions of the syntax.
When the _message_ contains right-to-left (RTL) translations or uses values that are RTL,
the plain-text of the message and the Unicode Bidirectional Algorithm (UBA, UAX#9)
interact in ways that make the _message_ unintelligible or difficult to parse visually.

Machines do not have a problem parsing _messages_ that contain RTL characters,
but users need to be able to discern what a _message_ does,
what _variant_ will be selected,
or what a _placeholder_ will evaluate into.

In addition, it is possible to construct messages that use bidi characters to spoof
users into believing that a _message_ does something different than what it actually does.

The current syntax does not permit bidi controls in _name_ tokens,
_unquoted_ literal values,
or in the whitespace portions of a _message_.

Permitting the **isolate** controls and the standalone strongly-directional markers
would enable tools, including translation tools, and users who speak RTL languages

> to format a _message_ so that it's plain-text representation and its function

Reviewer: Minor
```suggestion
to format a _message_ so that its plain-text representation and its function
```

are unambiguous.

The isolate controls are paired invisible control characters inserted around a portion of a string.
The start of an isolate sequence is one of:
- U+2066 LEFT-TO-RIGHT ISOLATE (LRI)

> - U+2067 RIGHT-TO-LEFT ISOALTE (RLI)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- U+2067 RIGHT-TO-LEFT ISOLATE (RLI)
```

- U+2068 FIRST-STRONG ISOLATE (FSI)

The end of an isolate sequence is U+2069 POP DIRECTIONAL ISOLATE (PDI).

The characters inside an isolate sequence have the initial string (paragraph) direction

> corresponding to the starting control (LTR for LRI, RTL for RLI, auto for FSI).

Reviewer 3: Do all editors reset the paragraph direction after a newline? For example, if there's a newline between an LRI and an FSI, how is the paragraph direction of the second line determined?

Reviewer: The normal application of the bidi algorithm requires a reset on each paragraph, wherein a newline breaks paragraphs. 

"The algorithm reorders text only within a paragraph; characters in one paragraph have no effect on characters in a different paragraph. Paragraphs are divided by the Paragraph Separator or appropriate Newline Function (for guidelines on the handling of CR, LF, and CRLF, see Section 4.4, Directionality, and Section 5.8, Newline Guidelines of [[Unicode](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr41/tr41-32.html#Unicode)]). Paragraphs may also be determined by higher-level protocols: for example, the text in two different cells of a table will be in different paragraphs."

Author: @macchiati is correct. That's why it's called "paragraph direction". Note that newlines don't help us that much: they are optional in our syntax (outside literals) and technically normalize to space (or nothing). That is, the newline doesn't help us if we end up writing the message as a single-line.

Reviewer 3: Ok, so given that we allow for newlines within "code" and, specifically, expressions, I think we need to account for that so that we can keep the direction of the code as left-to-right, even when the first strongly directional character on the line is RTL.

As I understand it, not even an LRI/FSI pair inside the braces is always enough to keep the `$` on the left side of its name if it's preceded by a newline:

```js
a = 'אחד'
b = 'שתיים'
s = a + '{\u2066\n$' + b + '\u2069}'
```

Author: That's correct. Getting the sigils to stay on the left side needs a base direction of LTR. An LRM doesn't help in your example either (except to prevent spillover with the following annotation if there were any). My proposal is not 100% bulletproof (and requires some action on the part of tools or users).

A bulletproof design would require more isolates and would probably be limited to using LRI/PDI pairs. It would be difficult to work with, given that there would be a lot of invisible control characters inside subcomponents of an expression, e.g.:

```
<LRI><LRI>option<PDI>[whitespace]=[whitespace]<LRI>value<PDI><PDI>
```

> around patterns.

## Use-Cases

_What use-cases do we see? Ideally, quote concrete examples._

Presentation of keys can change if values are not isolated:
```
.match {$م2صر :string}{$num :integer}
م2صر 0 {{The {$م2صر} is actually the first key}}
م2صر * {{This one appears okay}}
```

Presentation in an expression can change if values are not isolated or restore LTR order:
> In the following example, we use the same string with a number inserted into the middle of
> the string to make the bidi effects visible.
> The numbers correspond to:
> 1. operand
> 2. function
> 3. option name
> 4. option value

```
You have {$م1صر :م2صر م3صر=م4صر} <- no controls
You have {$م1صر‎ :م2صر‎ م3صر‎=م4صر‎} <- LRM after each RTL token
```

## Requirements

_What properties does the solution have to manifest to enable the use-cases above?_

To prevent RTL _literals_ from having spillover effects with surrounding syntax,
it should be possible to bidi isolate a _quoted_ or _unquoted_ _literal_.

>```
> .local $title = {|البحرين مصر الكويت!|}
> .local $egypt = {مصر :string}
>```

To prevent _patterns_ from having spillover effects with other parts of a _message_,
particularly with _keys_ in a _variant_,

> it should be possible to bidi isolate a _quoted-pattern_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it should be possible to bidi-isolate a _quoted-pattern_.
```

it should be possible to include "local effect" bidi controls following an _identifier_,
_name_,
_option value_,
or _literal_.
These controls must not be included into the _identifier_, _name_, _option value_, or _literal_,
that is, it must be possible to distinguish these characters from the value in question.

>```
> You can use {$م1صر‎ :م2صر‎ م3صر‎=م4صر‎}
>```

## Constraints

_What prior decisions and existing conditions limit the possible design?_

Users cannot be expected to create or manage bidirectional controls or
marks in _messages_, since the characters are invisible and can be difficult
to manage.
Tools (such as resource editors or translation editors)
and other implementations of MessageFormat 2 serialization are strongly
encouraged to provide paired isolates around any right-to-left
syntax as described in this design so that _messages_ display appropriately as plain text.

## Proposed Design

_Describe the proposed solution. Consider syntax, formatting, errors, registry, tooling, interchange._

Permit isolating bidi controls to be used on the **outside** of the following:
- unquoted literals
- quoted literals

> - quoted patterns

Reviewer 3: Should we also allow for an LRI/FSI pair immediately inside expressions and markup, or is there a reason not to do so?

Author: We could do that also. It doesn't solve the problem of expression/markup internal bidi, though.

Reviewer 3: I'm mostly here thinking of content like:
```js
a = 'אחד'
b = 'שתיים'
s = a + '{$' + b + '}'
```

where we have an RTL variable name inside a placeholder in an RTL pattern.

How, except with an LRI/FSI pair inside the braces, can we get that to render so that the `:` is to the left of the name?

Reviewer: See #discussion_r1542105763
For those implementations, RLM/LRM are the best one can do.

This would change the ABNF as follows:
```abnf
literal        = ( open-isolate (quoted / unquoted) close-isolate)
               / (quoted / unquoted)
quoted-pattern = ( open-isolate "{{" pattern "}}" close-isolate)
               / ("{{" pattern "}}")

open-isolate   = %x2066-2068
close-isolate  = %x2069
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> The isolating controls go on the **_outside_** of the various _literal_ and _pattern_
> productions because characters on the **_inside_** of these are part of the normal text.
> We need to allow users to include bidi controls in the output of MFv2.

Permit the use of LRM or RLM controls immediately following:
- name (note that this includes _identifiers_ as well as names of

>   _functions_, _variables_, and _unquoted_ literals

Reviewer 3: Why LRM/RLM rather than isolates?

Why allow for RLM?

Reviewer 3: Given that we allow a number of neutral direction characters also in `name-start`, doesn't the same apply to the beginning of the name as well?

From an automation PoV, using FSI/PDI to wrap names seems like it would "just work", whereas LRM/RLM/ALM would require inspecting the contents of the string to figure out what might be needed.

Author: If we are strictly talking about machines doing the "bidi annotation", tightly wrapping with isolates will generally work. 

FSI is not always going to get the right results, as not all tokens have the correct direction strongly directional character nearest the front. There is an element of judgement (machines don't have enough information, generally, to decide this, although sometimes they do).

But going back to my initial statement: humans write these strings and create translations of these strings. Sometimes the easiest way for them to make the message look correct is to add a strongly directional mark vs. wrapping. (Note that ICU produces marks on some number and date formats to coerce proper display).

You are correct that the design document should call out these use cases separately so that the reader (and ultimately the WG) can weight supporting these mechanisms appropriately.

Reviewer 3: @macchiati:
> Some implementations don't handle bidi isolates well yet.

Is there a list available anywhere of software that does not yet support bidi isolates?

> The one tricky part with `name` is whether we permit it between the `namespace` and `name`
> part of an `identifier`.

This would change the ABNF as follows:
```abnf
namespace = name-start *name-char ; same as name but lacks bidi close
name      = name-start *name-char [%x200E-200F]
```

> [!NOTE]
> Ideally we do not want RLM/LRM to be part of the `name` or part of any

> > production that consumes `name` (such as `variable`, `reserved-keyword`, or `unquoted`).

Reviewer 3: I don't think this is an important concern; it's easy to add language to `syntax.md` stating that these characters are not considered as a part of the value of these rules.

Author: Agreed, but I want to call out that these characters are not intended to parse into the name.

Author: I changed the approach to make this text moot. I then moved this text to the "constraints" section, in hopes that the design addresses it.

> This is complicated to do in ABNF because each of these tokens is followed either by
> whitespace or by some closing marker such as `}`.
> The workaround in #763 is to permit these characters _before_ or _after_ whitespace
> using the various whitespace productions.
> This works at the cost of allowing spurious markers.

## Alternatives Considered

_What other solutions are available?_
_How do they compare against the requirements?_
_What other properties they have?_

### Nothing
We could do nothing.

A likely outcome of doing nothing is that RTL users would insert bidi controls into
_messages_ in an attempt to make the _pattern_ and/or _placeholders_ to display correctly.
These controls would become part of the output of the _message_,
showing up inappropriately at runtime.
Because these characters are invisible, users might be very frustrated trying to manage
the results or debug what is wrong with their messages.

By contrast, if users insert too many or the wrong controls using the recommended design,
the _message_ would still be functional and would emit no undesired characters.

### Deeper Syntax Changes
We could alter the syntax to make it more "bidi robust", 

> such as by using strongly directional instead of neutrals.

Reviewer 3: One way of doing this would be to only allow RTL characters in text and literals, and not in `name`.

Author: I would only ever support this if `name` were limited to ASCII letters/digits. We use `name` _everywhere_ (including for unquoted). Also, what's the point of allowing a wide range of Unicode, only to disable RTL language users?

Reviewer 3: I agree, and would find the limitation to ASCII weird and rather parochially American.

Reviewer: I do too!

Reviewer 2: Even if it's not an alternative anyone would support, maybe it's worth documenting Eemeli's suggestion as another alternative considered, if only to say it's an immediate non-starter.

due to [spillover](https://www.w3.org/TR/i18n-glossary/#dfn-spillover-effects).

To prevent spillover effects and to allow users (particularly RTL language users)
to author _messages_ in a straightforward way, we want to allow the syntax to include appropriate
bidirectional support and to recommend to tool and translation technology implementers
mechanisms to make _messages_ that include RTL characters easy to work with
without introducing spoofing or "Trojan Source" attack vectors.

## Background

_What context is helpful to understand this proposal?_

If you are unfamiliar with bidirectional or right-to-left text, there is a basic introduction 
[here](https://www.w3.org/International/articles/inline-bidi-markup/uba-basics).

MessageFormat _message_ strings are created and edited primarily by humans.
The original _message_ is often written by a software developer or user experience designer.
Translators need to work with the target-language versions of each _message_.
Like many templating or domain-specific languages, MF2 uses neutrally-directional symbols
to form portions of the syntax.

> When the _message_ contains right-to-left (RTL) translations or uses values that are RTL,

Author: Values here means identifiers or tokens, that is, syntactic values such as `$مصر` or ` ⁦:مصر⁩ ` or an option name or value. I don't mean the "resolved value" behind a variable name.

the plain-text of the message and the Unicode Bidirectional Algorithm (UBA, UAX#9)
interact in ways that make the _message_ unintelligible or difficult to parse visually.

Machines do not have a problem parsing _messages_ that contain RTL characters,
but users need to be able to discern what a _message_ does,
what _variant_ will be selected,

> or what a _placeholder_ will evaluate into.

Author: Developers write messages too. It's from both perspectives.

In addition, it is possible to construct messages that use bidi characters to spoof
users into believing that a _message_ does something different than what it actually does.

The current syntax does not permit bidi controls in _name_ tokens,
_unquoted_ literal values,
or in the whitespace portions of a _message_.

Permitting the **isolate** controls and the standalone strongly-directional markers

> would enable tools, including translation tools, and users who speak RTL languages

Author: that's a reasonable change, although really the verb we want is "write" 😉

The isolate controls are paired invisible control characters inserted around a portion of a string.
The start of an isolate sequence is one of:
- U+2066 LEFT-TO-RIGHT ISOLATE (LRI)
- U+2067 RIGHT-TO-LEFT ISOLATE (RLI)
- U+2068 FIRST-STRONG ISOLATE (FSI)

The end of an isolate sequence is U+2069 POP DIRECTIONAL ISOLATE (PDI).

The characters inside an isolate sequence have the initial string (paragraph) direction
corresponding to the starting control (LTR for LRI, RTL for RLI, auto for FSI).
The isolate sequence is **isolated** from surrounding text.
This means that the surrounding text treats it as-if the sequence were a single neutral character.

> [!NOTE]
> One of the side-effects of using `{`/`}` and `{{`/`}}` to delimit _expressions_
> and _patterns_ is that these paired enclosing punctuations provide a measure of
> isolation in UBA.
> This is an additional reason not to change over to quote marks (which are not enclosing)
> around patterns.

## Use-Cases

_What use-cases do we see? Ideally, quote concrete examples._

1. Presentation of keys can change if values are not isolated:
```
.match {$م2صر :string}{$num :integer}
م2صر 0 {{The {$م2صر} is actually the first key}}

> م2صر * {{This one appears okay}}

Author: The output isn't the issue here.

The first variant is actually:

```
\u06452\u0635\u0631 0 {{The {$\u06452\u0635\u0631} is actually the first key}}
```

That is, the first key is `م2صر `, not `0` (as it appears to be visually). The `\u` encoding shows the _actual logical order_ of the keys. Try selecting the text on that line...

```

> 2. Presentation in an expression can change if values are not isolated or restore LTR order:

Author: It means the tokens in the syntax.

> In the following example, we use the same string with a number inserted into the middle of
> the string to make the bidi effects visible.
> The numbers correspond to:
> 1. operand
> 2. function
> 3. option name
> 4. option value

```
You have {$م1صر :م2صر م3صر=م4صر} <- no controls

> You have {$م1صر‎ :م2صر‎ م3صر‎=م4صر‎} <- LRM after each RTL token

Author: fixed

```

3. As a developer or translator, I want to make RTL literal or names appear correctly
   in my plain-text editing environment.
   I don't want to have to manage a lot of paired controls, when I can get the right effect using

>    strongly directional mark characters (LRM, RLM, ALM)

Author: fixed

4. As a translation tool or MF2 implementation, I want to automatically generate normalized
   _messages_ that display correctly in RTL languages or containing RTL substrings with minimal user intervention.

## Requirements

_What properties does the solution have to manifest to enable the use-cases above?_

To prevent RTL _literals_ from having spillover effects with surrounding syntax,
it should be possible to bidi isolate a _quoted_ or _unquoted_ _literal_.

>```

> > .local $title = {|البحرين مصر الكويت!|}

Reviewer 2: Ah, my eyes were deceiving me. I thought the literal ended here: |الكويت -- but I see that that's a different character that just looks like a `|`.

> .local $egypt = {مصر :string}
>```

To prevent _patterns_ from having spillover effects with other parts of a _message_,
particularly with _keys_ in a _variant_,
it should be possible to bidi-isolate a _quoted-pattern_.

>```
> .match {$foo :string}

> > isolate {{البحرين مصر الكويت!}}

Reviewer 2: Is `isolate` proposed syntax, or a key?

Reviewer 3: A key.

>```

> To prevent _markup_, _placeholders_, or _expressions_ from having spillover effects 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To prevent _placeholders_ (_markup_ or _expressions_) from having spillover effects 
```

Reviewer 3: The spillover can also occur in declarations and the `.match` statement. It won't have an effect on the parsing, but the appearance to a user.

with other parts of a _message_
it should be possible to bidi isolate the contents of a _markup_ or an _expression_.

>```
> You can find it in {$مصر}.
>```

To prevent RTL identifiers from having spillover effects with other parts of an _expression_,

> it should be possible to include "local effect" bidi controls following an _identifier_,

Reviewer 2: Can't we omit "identifier" since an identifier ends with a name?

Author: Identifiers end with names, but also contain names in the namespace position. I wanted to be clear that we meant the end of an identifier in this case.

_name_,
_option value_,
or _literal_.
These controls must not be included into the _identifier_, _name_, _option value_, or _literal_,

> that is, it must be possible to distinguish these characters from the value in question.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that is, it must be possible to distinguish these characters from the term in question.
```

"Value" is very confusing since there are also "option values". I suggest "term" since _names, _option values_, etc. are all terms in the grammar.

Or, it might be more precise to say something like "the characters should not appear in parsed output" (i.e. the relevant nodes in the data model).

_What prior decisions and existing conditions limit the possible design?_

Users cannot be expected to create or manage bidirectional controls or
marks in _messages_, since the characters are invisible and can be difficult
to manage.
Tools (such as resource editors or translation editors)
and other implementations of MessageFormat 2 serialization are strongly
encouraged to provide paired isolates around any right-to-left
syntax as described in this design so that _messages_ display appropriately as plain text.

## Proposed Design

_Describe the proposed solution. Consider syntax, formatting, errors, registry, tooling, interchange._

Permit isolating bidi controls to be used on the **outside** of the following:
- unquoted literals
- quoted literals
- quoted patterns

This would change the ABNF as follows:
```abnf
literal        = ( open-isolate (quoted / unquoted) close-isolate)
               / (quoted / unquoted)
quoted-pattern = ( open-isolate "{{" pattern "}}" close-isolate)
               / ("{{" pattern "}}")

open-isolate   = %x2066-2068
close-isolate  = %x2069
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> The isolating controls go on the **_outside_** of the various _literal_ and _pattern_

> > productions because characters on the **_inside_** of these are part of the normal text.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> productions because characters on the **_inside_** of these are uninterpreted.
```

Author: I disagree with this change. Perhaps omit "normal" or perhaps:

```suggestion
> productions because characters on the **_inside_** of these are not part of the MF2 syntax.
```

> > We need to allow users to include bidi controls in the output of MF2.

Reviewer 2: Is this worth adding to the "constraints" section? Constraint: we must allow bidi controls as either literal (interpreted by the MF2 parser) or escaped (treated as regular text). (Their position introduces an implicit escape.)

Author: Not sure I follow? The point of the note is to show that bidi controls are just normal text _inside_ literal contexts (the body of a pattern or inside of quoted literals)

Permit the use of LRM, RLM, or ALM controls immediately following:

> - name (note that this includes _identifiers_ as well as names of
>   _functions_, _variables_, and _unquoted_ literals

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- name (note that this includes _unquoted_ literals_, _identifiers_, and _variables_;
and that _identifiers_ include the names of _functions_.)
```

(It's a bit confusing to say that an unquoted literal has a name.)

Author: Perhaps, but that's how `unquoted` is defined:

```abnf
unquoted       = name / number-literal
```

> The one tricky part with `name` is whether we permit it between the `namespace` and `name`
> part of an `identifier`.

This would change the ABNF as follows:
```abnf
namespace = name-start *name-char ; same as name but lacks bidi close
name      = name-start *name-char [%x200E-200F / %x061C]
```

> [!NOTE]

> > Ideally we do not want RLM/LRM/ALM to be part of the `name` or part of any
> > production that consumes `name` (such as `variable`, `reserved-keyword`, or `unquoted`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Ideally we do not want RLM/LRM/ALM to be part of the parsed
> `name`, `variable`, `reserved-keyword`, `unquoted`, or any other term
> defined in terms of `name`.
```

It reads a bit oddly to me to say that a production "consumes" something (the grammar is declarative; parsers consume things.)

> This is complicated to do in ABNF because each of these tokens is followed either by
> whitespace or by some closing marker such as `}`.
> The workaround in #763 is to permit these characters _before_ or _after_ whitespace
> using the various whitespace productions.
> This works at the cost of allowing spurious markers.

## Alternatives Considered

_What other solutions are available?_
_How do they compare against the requirements?_
_What other properties they have?_

### Nothing
We could do nothing.

A likely outcome of doing nothing is that RTL users would insert bidi controls into

> _messages_ in an attempt to make the _pattern_ and/or _placeholders_ to display correctly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_messages_ in an attempt to make the _pattern_ and/or _placeholders_ display correctly.
```

## Proposed Design

_Describe the proposed solution. Consider syntax, formatting, errors, registry, tooling, interchange._

Permit isolating bidi controls to be used on the **outside** of the following:
- unquoted literals
- quoted literals
- quoted patterns

This would change the ABNF as follows:
(Notice that this change includes a production `bidi` described further down
in this document)
```abnf
literal        = ( open-isolate (quoted / (unquoted [bidi])) close-isolate)
               / (quoted / (unquoted [bidi]))
quoted-pattern = ( open-isolate "{{" pattern "}}" close-isolate)
               / ("{{" pattern "}}")

open-isolate   = %x2066-2068
close-isolate  = %x2069
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> The isolating controls go on the **_outside_** of the various _literal_ and _pattern_
> productions because characters on the **_inside_** of these are part of the _literal_'s
> or _pattern_'s textual content.
> We need to allow users to include bidi controls in the output of MF2.

Permit isolating bidi controls to be used **immediately inside** the following:
- expressions
- markup

This would change the ABNF as follows (assuming the above changes are also incorporated):
```abnf

> expression            = "{" open-isolate (literal-expression / variable-expression / annotation-expression) close-isolate "}"

Reviewer 3: At the start we should only allow `%x2066`, i.e. LTR isolation.

Author: We permit RLI elsewhere. We *could* insist on left-to-right order. Allowing RLI might help with expressions that contain only an RTL literal:

```
{⁧لت-123-م...⁩} // RLI isolated
{لت-123-م...}
```

Reviewer 3: While that could work for rendering, it's conceptually really rather messy. We should in that case allow the isolation of the expression contents, _and_ the literal. So we'd have:
```js
s = 'لت-123-م'
e = '{\u2066\u2067' + s + '\u2069\u2069}'
```
where the outer `\u2066..\u2069` is for the expression and the inner `\u2067..\u2069` for the literal.

My point here is that immediately within braces we're always in "code" mode, and that should _always_ be LTR. Right inside that context we could well have a RTL literal, but for that the isolation shouldn't be coming from the `expression` rule, but the `literal` one.

Author: I understand. I also need to add the explicit "these message things are always LTR" to the design doc.

Reviewer 3: This is still not fixed. As expressions are code, and code is always LTR, the `expression` rule should not allow for anything other that an LRI.

Yes, this does introduce an ambiguity if the expression has a literal argument that can also be LRI-isolated, but it's pretty much the same ambiguity as we already have about whitespace.

                      / "{" (literal-expression / variable-expression / annotation-expression) "}"

> literal-expression    = [s] literal [s annotation] *(s attribute) [s]
> variable-expression   = [s] variable [s annotation] *(s attribute) [s]
> annotation-expression = [s] annotation *(s attribute) [s]

Reviewer 3: These aren't changing at all, right?
```suggestion
```

Author: They are changed. Originally they contained the `"{"` and `"}"` markers. I moved those up a level (which is debateable) to `expression` to keep the noise level down.

Permit isolating bidi controls to be used **immediately inside** the following:
- expressions
- markup

This would change the ABNF as follows (assuming the above changes are also incorporated):
```abnf
expression            = "{" open-isolate (literal-expression / variable-expression / annotation-expression) close-isolate "}"
                      / "{" (literal-expression / variable-expression / annotation-expression) "}"
literal-expression    = [s] literal [s annotation] *(s attribute) [s]
variable-expression   = [s] variable [s annotation] *(s attribute) [s]
annotation-expression = [s] annotation *(s attribute) [s]
markup = "{" [s] "#" identifier *(s option) *(s attribute) [s] ["/"] "}"                             ; open and standalone
       / "{" [s] "/" identifier *(s option) *(s attribute) [s] "}"                                   ; close
       / "{" open-isolate [s] "#" identifier *(s option) *(s attribute) [s] ["/"] close-isolate "}"  ; open and standalone
       / "{" open-isolate [s] "/" identifier *(s option) *(s attribute) [s] close-isolate "}"        ; close
```

Permit the use of LRM, RLM, or ALM stronly directional marks immediately following any of the items that

> **end** with the `name` production in the ABNF. 

Reviewer 3: I still think this is too messy, and doesn't solve the problem as well as isolation, but I'm ok with considering that separately.

My preferred overall solution would be to:
1. Optionally LR/RL/FS -isolate `quoted-pattern`, `quoted`, and `name`;
2. Optionally LR-isolate `expression`; and
3. Allow for a single LRM after a newline in code, or may at the end of whitespace containing a newline.

Put together, that should allow for rendering all code as LTR, and all possibly-RTL content as RTL.
